I tell you, he does sit in gold,
his eye red as 'twould burn Rome
and his injury the jailer to hispity.
I kneeled before him.
'Twas very faintly he said,"Rise,"
dismissed me thus, with hisspeechless hand.
You hear what he hath said whichwas sometime his general
who loved him in a most dearparticular.
He called me father.
But what of that?
Go, you that banished him,
a mile before his tent fall down
and knee the way into his mercy.
Nay, if he coyed to hearCominius speak,
I'll keep at home.
He would not seem to know me.
Do you hear?
Yet one time he did call me bymy name.
I urged our old acquaintance
and the drops that we have bledtogether.
Coriolanus he would not answerto,
forbad all names.
He was a kind of nothing,
titleless,
till he had forged himself
a name in the fire of burningRome.
Why, so.
You have made good work.
A pair of tribunes that haveracked for Rome
to make coals cheap, a noblememory.
I minded him how royal 'twas topardon
when it was less expected.
He replied, it was a barepetition of a state
to one whom they had punished.
Very well; could he say less?
I offered to awaken his regardfor his private friends.
His answer to me was,
he could not stay to pick them
in a pile of noisome, mustychaff.
He said 'twas folly for one poorgrain or two
to leave unburnt
and still to nose the offense.
For one poor grain or two.
I am one of those;
his mother, wife, his child,
and this brave fellow too, weare the grains.
You are the musty chaff,
and you are smelt above themoon.
We must be burnt for you.
Nay, pray, be patient.
If you refuse your aid in thisso never-needed help,
yet do not upbraid us for ourdistress.
But, sure, if you would be yourcountry's pleader,
your good tongue,
more than the instant army wecan make,
might stop our countryman.
No, I'll not meddle.
Pray you, go to him.
What should I do?
Only make trial what your lovecan do for Rome
towards Marcius.
Well, and say that Marciusreturn me,
as Cominius is returned,unheard; what then?
But as a discontented friendgrief-shot with his unkindness?
Say it be so?
Yet your good will must havethat thanks from Rome,
after the measure as youintended well.
I'll undertake it.
I think he'll hear me.
And the glorious gods love theeno worse
than thy old father Meneniusdoes.
O, my son; my son.
Thou art preparing fire for us.
Look thee, here is water toquench it.
I was hardly moved to come tothee,
but being assured that none butmyself could move thee,
I have been blown out of thygates with sighs
and conjure thee to pardon Rome
and thy petitionary countrymen.
Away.
How, away?
Wife, mother, child,
I know not.
My affairs are servanted toothers.
Though I owe my revengeproperly,
my remission lies in Volscianbreasts.
That we have been familiar,
ingrate forgetfulness shallpoison
rather than pity note how much.
Therefore, be gone.
My ears against your suits arestronger
than your gates against myforce.
Yet, for I loved thee, take thisalong.
I writ it for thy sake and wouldhave sent it.
Another word, Menenius, I willnot hear thee speak.
This man, Aufidius,
was my beloved in Rome.
Yet thou behold'st.
You keep a constant temper.
See you yond coign of thecapitol,
yond cornerstone?
Why, what of that?
If it be possible
for you to displace it with yourlittle finger,
there is some hope that theladies of Rome,
especially his mother, mayprevail with him.
But I say there is no hope init.
Our throats are sentenced andstay upon execution.
Is it possible that so short atime
can alter the condition of aman?
There is differency between agrub and a butterfly,
yet your butterfly was a grub.
This Marcius is grown from manto dragon.
He has wings.
He is more than a creepingthing.
He loved his mother dearly.
So did he me.
And he no more remembers hismother now
than an eight-year-old horse.
The tartness of his face soursripe grapes.
He sits in his state like athing made for Alexander.
What he bids be done is finishedwith his bidding.
He wants nothing of a god buteternity
and a heaven to throne in.
Yes, mercy, if you report himtruly.
I paint him in the character.
Mark what mercy his mother shallbring from him.
There's no more mercy in him
than there is milk in a maletiger,
that shall our poor city find,
and all this is long of you.
The gods be good unto us.
No, in such a case, the godswill not be good unto us.
When we banished him, werespected not them,
and, he returning to break ournecks,
they respect not us.
This last old man,
whom with a cracked heart I havesent to Rome,
loved me above the measure of afather,
nay, godded me, indeed.
Their latest refuge was to sendhim,
for whose old love I have,though I showed sourly to him,
once more offered the firstconditions,
which they did refuse and cannotnow accept
to grace him only that thoughthe could do more,
a very little I have yielded to.
Fresh embassies and suits,
nor from the state nor privatefriends
hereafter will I lend ear to.
My wife comes foremost,
then the honored mold whereinthis trunk was framed
and in her hand the grandchildto her blood.
But out, affection.
All bond and privilege of naturebreak.
Let it be virtuous to beobstinate.
What is that curt'sy worth,
or those doves' eyes which canmake gods forsworn?
I melt and am not of strongerearth than others.
My mother bows as if Olympus toa molehill
should in supplication nod,
and my young boy hath an aspectof intercession
which great nature cries, "Denynot."
Let the Volsces plow Rome andharrow Italy.
I'll never be such a gosling toobey instinct
but stand as if a man wereauthor of himself
and knew no other kin.
My lord and husband.
These eyes are not the same Iwore in Rome.
The sorrow that delivers us thuschanged makes you think so.
Like a dull actor now, I haveforgot my part,
and I am out, even to a fulldisgrace.
Best of my flesh, forgive mytyranny,
but do not say for that,"Forgive our Romans."
O, a kiss long as my exile,
sweet as my revenge.
Now, by the jealous queen ofHeaven,
that kiss I carried from thee,dear,
and my true lip hath virgined itever since.
Ye gods, I prate,
and the most noble mother in theworld leave unsaluted.
Sink my knee in the earth.
Of thy deep duty,
more impression show than thatof common sons.
O, stand up blest.
Whilst, with no softer cushionthan the flint,
I kneel before thee andunproperly show duty,
as mistaken all this whilebetween the child and parent.
What's this?
Your knees to me?
To your corrected son?
Then let the pebbles on thehungry beach
fillip the stars,
then let the mutinous winds
strike the proud cedars 'gainstthe fiery sun,
murdering impossibility
to make what cannot be slightwork.
Thou art my warrior.
I holp to frame thee.
Do you know this lady?
The noble sister of Publicola,
the moon of Rome,
chaste as the icicle that'scurdied by the frost
from purest snow and hangs onDian's temple.
Dear Valeria.
This is a poor epitome of yours,
which by the interpretation offull time
may show like all yourself.
The god of soldiers,
with the consent of supremeJove,
inform thy thoughts withnobleness.
Your knee, sirrah.
That's my brave boy.
Even he, your wife, this lady,and myself are suitors to you.
I beseech you, peace.
Or, if you'd ask, remember thisbefore:
The thing I have forsworn togrant
may never be held by youdenials.
Bid me not dismiss my soldiers
or capitulate again with Rome'smechanics.
Tell me not wherein I seemunnatural.
Desire not to ally my rages andrevenges
with your colder reasons.
O, no more; no more.
You have said you will not grantus any thing
for we have nothing else to ask
but that which you deny already,
yet we will ask
that if you fail in our request,
the blame may hang upon yourhardness.
Therefore, hear us.
Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark,
for we'll hear nought from Romein private.
Your request?
Should we be silent and notspeak,
our raiment and state of bodies
would bewray what life we haveled since thy exile.
Think with thyself how moreunfortunate
than all living women are wecome hither.
Since that thy sight,
which should make our eyes flowwith joy,
hearts dance with comforts,
constrains them weep and shakewith fear and sorrow,
making the mother, wife, andchild
to see the son, the father, thehusband
tearing his country's bowelsout.
And to poor we thine enmity'smost capital.
Thou barr'st us our prayers tothe gods,
which is a comfort that all butwe enjoy,
for how can we
alas,
how can we for our country pray
whereto we are bound,
together with thy victory,
whereto we are bound?
Alack, or we must lose thecountry, our dear nurse,
or else thy person,
our comfort in the country.
We must find an evidentcalamity,
though we had our wish whichside should win.
For either thou must, as aforeign recreant,
be led with manacles thoroughour streets,
or else triumphantly tread onthy country's ruin
and bear the palm for havingbravely shed
thy wife and children's blood.
For myself, son,
I purpose not to wait on fortunetill these wars determine.
If I cannot persuade thee ratherto show a noble grace
to both sides than seek the endof one,
thou shalt no sooner march toassault thy country
than to tread trust to it, thoushalt not
on thy mother's womb thatbrought thee to this world.
Ay, and mine that brought youforth this boy
to keep your name living totime.
A' shall not tread on me.
I'll run away till I am bigger,
but then I'll fight.
Not of a woman's tenderness tobe
requires nor child nor woman'sface to see.
I have sat too long.
Nay, go not from us thus.
If it were so that our requestdid tend to save the Romans
thereby to destroy the Volsceswhom you serve,
you might condemn us aspoisonous of your honor.
No.
Our suit is that you reconcilethem.
while the Volsces may say, "Thismercy we've showed,"
the Romans, "This we received,"
and each in either side give theall hail to thee
and cry, "Be blest for making upthis peace."
Thou know'st, great son, the endof war's uncertain,
but this certain,
that if thou conquer Rome,
the benefit which thou shaltthereby reap
is such a name whose repetition
shall be dogged with curses,
whose chronicle thus writ:
"The man was noble,
"but with his last attempt, hewiped it out,
"destroyed his country,
and his name remains to theensuing age abhorred."
Speak to me, son.
Thou hast affected the finestrains of honor,
to imitate the graces of thegods,
to tear with thunder the widecheeks of the air,
and yet to charge thy sulphurwith a bolt
that should but rive an oak.
Why dost not speak?
Think'st thou it honorable for anoble man
still to remember wrongs?
Daughter, speak you.
He cares not for your weeping.
Thou hast never in thy life
showed thy dear mother anycourtesy
when she, poor hen fond of nosecond brood,
has clucked thee to the wars andsafely home,
loaden with honor.
Say my request's unjust andspurn me back,
but if it be not so,
thou art not honest
and the gods will plague theethat thou restrain'st from me
the duty which to a mother'spart belongs.
He turns away.
Down, ladies.
Let us shame him with our knees.
To his surname, Coriolanus,
'longs more pride than pity toour prayers.
Down.
An end.
This is the last.
So we will home to Rome and dieamong our neighbors.
Nay, behold us.
This boy that cannot tell whathe would have
but kneels and holds up handsfor fellowship
does reason our petition withmore strength
than thou hast to deny it.
Come, let us go.
This fellow had a Volscian tohis mother.
His wife is in Corioli
and his child like him bychance.
Nay.
Give us our dispatch.
I am hushed until our city beafire,
and then I'll speak a little.
O, mother.
Mother.
What have you done?
Behold, the heavens do ope,
the gods look down,
and this unnatural scene
they laugh at.
O, my mother.
Mother.
O.
You have won a happy victory toRome,
but, for your son
Believe it; O, believe it,
most dangerously you have withhim prevailed,
if not most mortal to him.
But, let it come.
Aufidius,
though I cannot make true wars,
I'll frame convenient peace.
And, good Aufidius, were you inmy stead,
would you have heard a motherless
or granted less, Aufidius?
I was moved withal.
I dare be sworn you were.
And, sir, it is no little thing
to make mine eyes to sweatcompassion.
What, good sir, what peaceyou'll make,
advise me.
For my part, I'll not to Rome,
I'll back with you and pray you,
stand to me in this cause.
O, mother.
Wife.
I am glad thou hast set thymercy and thy honor
at difference in thee.
Out of that, I'll work myself aformer fortune.
Behold our patroness, the lifeof Rome.
Call all your tribes together,praise the gods,
and make triumphant fires.
Strew flowers before them.
Unshout the noise that banishedMarcius,
repeal him with the welcome ofhis mother,
cry, "Welcome, ladies; welcome."
Welcome, ladies;
welcome.
Go tell the lords of the city Iam here.
Deliver them this paper.
Most noble sir,
if you do hold the same intentwherein you wished us parties,
we'll deliver you of your greatdanger.
Sir, I cannot tell.
We must proceed as we do findthe people.
The people will remain uncertain
whilst 'twixt you there'sdifference,
but the fall of either makes thesurvivor heir of all.
I know it,
and my pretext to strike at himadmits a good construction.
He came unto my hearth,
presented to my knife histhroat.
I took him;
made him joint servant with me;
gave him way in all his owndesires;
nay, let him choose out of myranks
his projects to accomplish,
my best and freshest men;
served his designments in mineown person;
holp to reap the fame which hedid end all his;
and took some pride to do myselfthis wrong.
Till, at the last,
I seemed his follower notpartner,
and he waged me with hiscountenance
as if I had been mercenary.
So he did, my lord.
The army marveled at it, and, inthe last,
when he had carried Rome
and that we looked for no lessspoil than gloryó
There was it.
For the which my sinews shall bestretched upon him.
At a few drops of women's rheum,
which are as cheap as lies,
he sold the blood and labor ofour great action.
Therefore shall he die and I'llrenew me in his fall.
Hail, lords.
I am returned your soldier,
no more infected with mycountry's love
than when I parted hence
but still subsisting under yourgreat command.
You are to know
that prosperously I haveattempted
and with bloody passage
led your wars even to the gatesof Rome.
Our spoils we have brought homedoth more than counterpoise
a full third part the charges ofthe action.
We have made peace
with no less honor to theAntiates
than shame to the Romans
and here deliver,
subscribed by the consuls andpatricians,
together with the seal of thesenate,
what we have compounded on.
Read it not, noble lords,
but tell the traitor in thehighest degree
he hath abused your powers.
Traitor?
How now?
Ay, traitor, Marcius.
Marcius.
Ay, Marcius,
Caius Marcius.
Dost thou think I'll grace theewith that robbery,
thy stolen name Coriolanus inCorioli?
You lords and heads of thestate,
perfidiously he has betrayedyour business and given up,
for certain drops of salt, yourcity Rome.
I say "your city," to his wifeand mother,
breaking his oath and resolutionlike a twist of rotten silk,
never admitting counsels of thewar,
but at his nurse's tears,
he whined and roared away yourvictory
that pages blushed at him
and men of heart lookedwondering each at other.
Hear'st thou, Mars?
Name not the god, thou boy oftears.
No more.
Measureless liar,
thou hast made my heart toogreat for what contains it.
Boy.
O, slave.
Pardon me, lords.
'Tis the first time that ever Iwas forced to scold.
Your judgments, my grave lords,Must give this cur the lie
and his own notion,
who wears my stripes impressedupon him,
that must bear my beating to hisgrave,
shall join to thrust the lieunto him.
Cut me to pieces, Volsces.
Men and lads, stain all youredges on me.
Boy.
False hound.
If you have writ your annalstrue,
'tis there that, like an eaglein a dovecote,
I fluttered your Volscians inCorioli.
Alone I did it.
Boy.
Why, noble lords,
will you be put in mind of hisblind fortune,
which was your shame,
by this unholy braggart?
Peace, ho.
No outrage.
Peace.
The man is noble
and his fame folds in this orbof the earth.
His last offenses to us shallhave judicious hearing.
Stand, Aufidius, and trouble notthe peace.
O, that I had him, with sixAufidiuses
or more, his tribe, to use mylawful sword.
Insolent villain.
Kill.
Kill!
My lords,
when you shall know
as in this rage, provoked byhim, you cannot
the great danger this man's lifedid owe you,
you'll rejoice that he is thuscut off.
My rage is gone,
and I am struck with sorrow.
Though in this city
he hath widowed and unchildedmany a one
which to this hour bewail theinjury,
yet he shall have a noblememory.